---
title: "Software Development"
---

## Speakers

- Kevlin Henney
- Greg Young
- Michael Feathers
- Martin Thompson
- Bryan Cantrill
- Mark Seemann
- Jimmy Bogard
- Simon Brown
- Sam Newman
- Chad Fowler
- Kent Beck
- Casey Rosenthal
- Stefan Tilkov
- Michael Nygard
- Allen Holub
- John Hughes

## Decision Logs

Create logs that hold the following information:

- Problem you are deciding on
- Involved people
- What did you choose? Why? Risks?
- What other things have you considered? Why didn't you choose them?

Michael Nygard described his decision log structure in [this blog
post][architecture-decisions]:

- **Context:** Describe the forces at play
- **Decision:** Your response to these forces
- **Status:** The decision status (e.g. "proposed")
- **Consequences:** What happened afterwards?

[architecture-decisions]: https://cognitect.com/blog/2011/11/15/documenting-architecture-decisions

## How To Deal With Configuration

- Rely on useful default configuration which is stored inside the application:
  - e.g. using a log folder next to the application folder, using default
    schedule timers, etc.
  - Maybe it would make sense to create a default configuration file if it does
    not exist
- Allow external configuration via several sources. They can override each
  other:
  - Default values stored in the application
  - Configuration files
  - Command line arguments
  - Environment variables
- Throw a meaningful error on configuration problems
- Try to initialize resources if they are not found (e.g. create directories,
  create files, ...)
- Create application arguments which allows a user to specify a configuration
  file in a specific place
- Some configuration (e.g. plugging an application into ElasticSearch) should be
  disabled by default. A user can enable them if he wants to

## Cynefin Framework

- **Chaotic:** A crisis. Your best bet is to stabilize the situation
- **Complex:** (Creativity) You don't know what you don't know, so you have to try things out
  to understand your environment
  - Make the right system
- **Complicated:** (Skill) You kinda know what's going on so you can engineer a solution
  - Make the system right
- **Obvious:** (Automation) You can automate these steps

## Write Documentation If

- The thing you are documenting does not change often
- Your documentation will be useful to a large group of people

## [Four Kinds of Documentation](https://www.writethedocs.org/videos/eu/2017/the-four-kinds-of-documentation-and-why-you-need-to-understand-what-they-are-daniele-procida/)

- **Tutorial:** learning-oriented; a getting started guide
- **How-To Guide:** goal-oriented; how to solve a specific problem
- **Explanation:** understanding-oriented; provides background and context
- **Reference:** information-oriented; describes inner processes

## Chaos Engineering

Adding parameters for sleep timers and error rates to service requests can be an
easy way to test how a specific service deals with issues in isolation.

## [Database Migrations](https://martinfowler.com/articles/evodb.html)

- Every developer has his/her own database. The build script offers ways to
  create and delete a database based on a configuration file (which is not put
  into version control). This configuration file contains the database name as
  well as a connection string
- Migration scripts (and test data) are put into version control

## The Phoenix/Unicorn Project (Gene Kim)

Three Ways

- System Thinking
- Amplify Feedback Loops
- Culture Of Continual Experimentation And Learning

Five Types Of Work

- Business Projects
- Internal IT Projects
- Changes generated by the above
- Unplanned Work

Five Ideals

- Locality and Simplicity
- Focus, Flow, and Joy
- Improvement of Daily Work
- Psychological Safety
- Customer Focus

## Accelerate (Nicole Forsgren PhD, Jez Humble and Gene Kim)

The book outlines 24 capabilities that drive improvements software delivery
performance:

### Continuous Delivery

- Version control
- Deployment automation
- Continuous integration
- Trunk-based development
- Test automation
- Test data management
- Shift left on security
- Continuous delivery

### Architecture

- Loosely coupled architecture
- Empowered teams

### Product and Process

- Customer feedback
- Value stream
- Working in small batches
- Team experimentation

### Lean Management and Monitoring

- Change approval processes
- Monitoring
- Proactive notifications
- WIP limits
- Visualizing work

### Cultural

- Westrum organizational culture
- Supporting learning
- Collaboration among teams
- Job satisfaction
- Transformational leadership

## CAP Theorem

- **C**onsistency
- **A**vailability
- **P**artition tolerance

This theorem states that given a network partition (a split brain situation), a
distributed system can either favor consistency or availability.

**Example:** Imagine that you are part of a fully remote wedding. Let's imagine
that you answer "the big question" with yes and let's imagine that your
phone/internet connection breaks before your significant other can answer the
same question. What do you do? Do you say that you are married/not married (in
which case you would favor availability) or do you say "I don't know" (in which
case you would favor consistency).

The PACELC theorem is an extension to the CAP theorem: In case of a network
**P**artition, one has to choose between **A**vailability and **C**onsistency,
**E**lse, when a system does not have a partition, one has to choose between
**L**atency and **C**onsistency.

Martin Kleppmann posted an [interesting article][klepp-cap] in which he explains
that neither CAP nor PACELC are a good way to think about distributed systems.

[klepp-cap]: https://martin.kleppmann.com/2015/05/11/please-stop-calling-databases-cp-or-ap.html

## [Idealcast Podcast](https://itrevolution.com/the-idealcast-podcast/)

### Jeffrey Fredrick (Episode 14)

Employee satisfaction can indicate the performance of an organization. Ask:

- Are you happy?
- Are you able to do work that you are proud of?

### Scott Havens (Episode 22 & 23)

- State management techniques used in functional programming can be used to
  scale large architecture such as Wal-Mart's warehouse system
- Working with event streams as input and output makes a system decoupled,
  easier to test and more understandable
- A pure function can be replaced by a lookup table
- Scott mentions a story about how they recovered from a disaster involving the
  death of a Kafka cluster
- He also tells the story of how he replaced a synchronous call graph involving
  23 procedures with asynchronous computation
- Category theory is not too important in your day-to-day use of functional
  patterns

## Believes

- Working code is only the beginning
- Be prepared to throw away something you’ve done in order to do something
  different
- Always look for better ways of doing things
- “Good enough” isn’t good enough
- Code is a liability, not an asset
- Treat code like a garden. You are never "done"
- Prefer immutability
- Model actions as data
- Abstractions and data schemata are hard to get right. You will most likely
  change them in the future, so prepare yourself
- Time != Money
- Technical excellence is not everything
- Backups don't mean anything unless you have actually tried to restore data
  from them
